---
layout: post
title: "Lab 4: A Rocket Flight Revisited (Week 8)"
categories: lab
---

Revisit the rocket flight studied in a previous lab. We’d like to consider a more accurate model
of the rocket flight with aerodynamic drag. This time, allow the mass of the rocket to vary
throughout the flight rather than remaining constant. The changing mass allows us to model the
effect of propellant being burned off and ejected during the flight.

In order to model the changing mass of the rocket, use the
[provided thrust data](https://dl.dropboxusercontent.com/u/10724484/me300/Aerotechdata.mat) for the rocket
motor. The thrust data are an array of time values (in seconds) and thrust force values (in
Newtons), and were obtained from the rocket motor manufacturer. Assume that, of the initial
12&nbsp;lbf rocket weight, 4&nbsp;lbf are propellant mass and the remaining 8&nbsp;lbf accounts for the fuselage,
non-combustible motor parts, and all other components excluding fuel.

Use an appropriate interpolation method to estimate the rocket thrust at any time during the
flight. Use this interpolation to update the mass of the rocket as the flight progresses. Use and
document sound engineering justification for your selection of time step as well as mass update
equations.

Compare the results of your new model with mass update to your results for both aerodynamic
drag with constant mass and experimental data (both from previous lab results). Comment
critically on the results. Do they match your expectations? Why or why not? Discuss possible
strengths or weaknesses of your modeling approach.

Prepare an informal report communicating your methodology, assumptions, results, and
discussion. Include plots of the rocket’s velocity and altitude, comparing both models to the
experimental results on the same graph. Also include a table summarizing the key results, similar
to that prepared in the first rocket lab. The report is to be submitted at the start of lab in Week 9.
