---
layout: post
title: "Lab 1: A Rocket Flight (Week 2/3)"
categories: lab
---

For this first lab exercise, I provide a detailed set of requirements/guidelines for your report.
Future lab reports should follow this general format.
Lab reports should be prepared in a concise and professional manner.
The complete lab report should provide enough information for me to reproduce your work and understand the rationale behind your decisions.

# Problem Statement (0.5 pg, 10%)
Consider a rocket whose flight is comprised of two segments:

- During the first segment, the rocket is propelled upward by a constant thrust force of 121&#8239;lbf for 3&#8239;s, at which time the rocket fuel is exhausted.
- In the second segment, the rocket continues to fly upward while slowing down under the force of gravity (assumed to be constant) and aerodynamic drag until it reaches an apex in altitude.

Include in this section a detailed, labeled figure along with the description of the problem. The figure should label coordinate reference frames, variable names and datum points, and a consistent set of engineering units.

# Assumptions (0.5 pg, 10%)
List all relevant assumptions necessary for you to write out a mathematical model for the
rocket flight. This list should include stipulations of which quantities vary and which are
assumed to remain constant. The assumptions should also list the different relevant physical
assumptions before any numerical approximations are introduced. For example:
For the drag acting on the rocket (in both segments), make three progressively more
accurate assumptions about the dependence of the drag force on rocket velocity:

- **Model A, Zero drag** Use parameters $$W = {12}{\,\rm lbf}$$ and $$g = {32.2}{\,\rm ft/s^2}$$.
- **Model B, Linear drag** Model the drag force $$F_D$$ using

$$
F_D = C_{\mathit{LD}} V,
$$

where $$C_{\mathit{LD}}$$ is the coefficient of drag and $$V$$ is the
velocity of the rocket. Use parameters
$$C_{\mathit{LD}} = {0.01}{\,\rm slug/s}$$, $$W = {12}{\,\rm lbf}$$, and $$g = {32.2}{\,\rm ft/s^2}$$.
- **Model C, Aerodynamic drag** Model the drag force $$F_D$$ using

$$
F_D = \frac{1}{2} \rho C_D A V^2,
$$

where $$\rho$$ is the density of the fluid,
$$C_D$$ is the drag proportionality factor,
$$A$$ is the cross-sectional area presented to the airflow,
and $$V$$ is the velocity of the rocket. Use parameters
$$\rho = {0.0023}{\,\rm slug/ft^3}$$, $$C_D = 0.3$$, and a rocket diameter of {4}{\,\rm in}.


# Mathematical Model (1 pg, 30%)
Derive the differential equation governing velocity of the rocket for both phases of the
flight (powered and gliding) using all three drag models.
Your mathematical model should include (but not be limited to) for each model:

- A statement of the conservation or balance principle at work
- A free body diagram and force balance to derive the governing ODE
- A statement of the initial condition(s)

# Solution (3 pg, 20%)
You are to develop and program a numerical algorithm to calculate and plot the rocket’s
velocity, $$v(t)$$, and altitude, $$h(t)$$, as functions of time during the flight.
As part of your solution, you should produce three separate graphs and a table:

- One for the 3 velocity histories, $v(t)$, using the three different assumptions for the drag force plotted on the same graph.
- One for 3 altitude histories, $h(t)$, using the three different assumptions for the drag force plotted on the same graph.
- Ideally one would want to compare the numerical solutions with theoretical solutions and experimental data (when either or both of these are available). Analytical solutions, in fact, exist for all three models using each of the 3 drag assumptions. For this lab, you are to derive the analytical solution using the linear drag law only and compare it on the same graph with your numerical predictions from the model using this linear drag assumption.
- You are to report a summary of the key results in a table similar to the following:

<table>
<thead>
<tr><th>Result</th><th>No Drag</th><th>Linear Drag</th><th>Aerodynamic Drag</th></tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr><td>Peak Altitude, $$h_{\max}$$</td><td>??</td><td>??</td><td>??</td></tr>
<tr><td>Time of Peak Altitude, $$t(h_{\max})$$</td><td>??</td><td>??</td><td>??</td></tr>
<tr><td>Peak Velocity, $$v_{\max}$$</td><td>??</td><td>??</td><td>??</td></tr>
<tr><td>Time of Peak Velocity, $$t(v_{\max})$$</td><td>??</td><td>??</td><td>??</td></tr>
</tbody>
</table>

*All* graphs and tables *must include* the time step size either on the graph/table or in its caption or title.
Tables and figures should *always* include labels and units for numerical values.

# Interpretation of Results (1 pg, 30%)
Your discussion of results should include (but not be limited to) a meaningful discussion of error analysis including:

- Errors introduced by your numerical approximations: comment on how time step size affects your truncation error and comparison with either theory or experiments (where available).
- Errors introduced by your physical assumptions: comment on the effects these assumptions have on the model predictions.

Remember that these are totally separate sources of error and have nothing to do
with one another.

> Note: You must bring to lab in Week 3 the plots and table of numerical predictions described in the Solution section.

# Week 3 Lab Additions
We will now focus on a more realistic model.
You will be provided with real time acceleration data for the rocket flight.

Add the following results and discussion to your final report:

## Solution

1. Describe the algorithm for trapezoidal or Simpson’s integration (whichever you choose to use in (2) and (3) below). You must include the algorithmic equation in this section of your final report.
2. Use the trapezoidal or Simpson’s rule to integrate the provided acceleration data to determine the rocket velocity and compare (on a single graph) this experimental velocity history to algorithmic model predictions using the linear and aerodynamic drag models (only).
3. Use the trapezoidal or Simpson’s rule to integrate your velocity data to determine the rocket altitude and compare (on a single graph) this experimental altitude history to algorithmic model predictions using the linear and aerodynamic drag models (only).

## Interpretation of Results
Comment on numerical errors and the quality and accuracy of your numerical
simulations. How well do the numerical predictions of velocity and altitude
compare with those obtained from the experimental data?

> Note: The complete lab report is due at the beginning of the lab in Week 4. No exceptions will be made. Any material that should appear in the sections described, but appears in an Appendix instead, will not be read or included in your final grade.
