---
layout: post
title: Course Syllabus
categories: doc
---

# Course Information

Title
: Modeling and Numerical Analysis

Course Code and Term
: ME 300 111; Fall 2016.

Program
: Mechanical Engineering Program; Milwaukee School of Engineering.

Textbook
: Steven C. Chapra and Raymond P. Canale. *Numerical Methods for Engineers.*
7th ed. New York: McGraw-Hill Education, 2015.

Prerequisite
: ME 230 (Dynamics of Systems).

Schedule
: Lecture: M 5:00--6:50 pm, W 5:00--5:50 pm. Lab: W 6:00--7:50 pm.

Course Credits
: 3-2-4 (lecture-lab-credit)

Description
: This course is a study of mathematical techniques used to model engineering
systems. It involves the development of mathematical models and the application
of the computer to solve engineering problems using the following computational
techniques: Taylor Series approximation, numerical differentiation, root finding
using bracketing and open methods, linear and polynomial curve fitting, solution
methods for matrix equations, numerical integration, and the solution of
differential equations. Laboratory sessions involve the application of numerical
analysis to physical systems involving statics, dynamics, fluid dynamics, heat
transfer, electrical circuits, and vibratory systems.

# Instructor Information

Instructor
: Professor Paul D. Gessler, MSME

Email
: [gessler@msoe.edu](mailto:gessler@msoe.edu)

Mobile Phone
: 414-241-1627     
  *If this is abused, your number will be blocked.*

Office
: S-125

Office Hours
: MW 4:00--4:50 pm. Additional times by appointment.

# Course Objectives

Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:

- model engineering systems using first and second order differential equations,
  and solve the equations both analytically and numerically,
- employ the Taylor Series for approximation and error analysis,
- formulate and apply numerical techniques for root finding, curve fitting,
  differentiation, and integration,
- write computer programs to solve engineering problems, and
- interpret numerical solutions.

# Course Topics and Tentative Outline

| Wk | Topics | Reading |
|:-: | :----- | :------ |
| 1 | Course Introduction | 1 |
| 2 | Numerical Approximation |  3  |
|   | Taylor Series | 4, 4.1, 4.3--4.4 |
|   | Computational Errors | 3.3--3.4 |
|   | Lab: First-Order System ||
| 3 | First and Second Derivatives | 4, 4.1.3, 23, 23.1, 21 |
|   | Trapezoidal and Simpson's Rules | 21.1--21.3, PT7, PT7.1--PT7.2 |
| 4 | Analytical Solutions | 25, 25.1--25.2 |
|   | Ordinary Differential Equations, Euler Methods | |
|   | Modified Euler Methods | |
|   | Lab: Second-Order System ||
| 5 | Predictor-Corrector Methods | 25.3 |
|   | Midpoint Method, Runge-Kutta Methods | |
| 6 | Implicit Methods, Convergence Issue, | 26, 26.1, 28, 28.4 |
|   | Time Step Sizes, Characteristic Response Times | |
|   | Lab: *Midterm Exam* | |
| 7 | Root Finding, Bracketing Methods | 5, 6, 6.1--6.2, 6.5 |
|   | Newton's Method, Nonlinear Systems of Equations | |
|   | Lab: Two Degree-of-Freedom System ||
| 8 | Curve Fitting, Least Squares Regression | 17, 17.1, 18, 18.2, 18.6 |
|   | Linear Interpolation, Polynomial Interpolation | |
|   | Spline Interpolation | |
|   | Lab: Rocket Flight Revisited ||
| 9 | Computing with Matrices, Gaussian Elimination | 9, 9.1--9.4, 9.7 |
|   | Gauss-Jordan Method, Matrix Inversion, Iterative Methods | 11, 11.2, 12, 12.4 |
|   | Lab: Heated Fin ||
| 10 | 2D Boundary Value Problems | 30, 31 |
|    | Summary of Methods, Course Review | |
| (11) | *Final Exam* | --- |

# Course Grading

Grading Breakdown
: Course grades are calculated using the following categories and corresponding
  weights:

  | Category | Weight |
  | :- | -: |
  | Lab Reports | 30% |
  | Homework | 15% |
  | Participation | 5% |
  | Midterm Exam | 25% |
  | Final Exam | 25% |
  |=====
  | Total | 100% |

Grading Scale
: Letter grades are earned according to the MSOE grading scale:

  | Letter Grade | % Equivalent |
  | :- | -: |
  |A | 100--93|
  |AB|92--89|
  |B |88--85|
  |BC|84--81|
  |C |80--77|
  |CD|76--74|
  |D |73--70|    
  |F |69--00|

# Course Policies

Bring a calculator, your course textbook, and laptop to class every day.
You must have MATLAB and Excel installed and functioning in order to succeed in this course.
Contact the IT HelpDesk with any software issues.

Class time is reserved for class activities, as determined in the sole discretion of the instructor.
Non-class activities include, but are not limited to:
email, instant messaging, text messaging, "vaping",
and non-course-related web browsing.
This is a professional environment with students from a wide variety of backgrounds.
As in the workplace, inappropriate screensavers, desktop backgrounds, or other imagery will not be tolerated.

Exceptions to course policies will be made only for legitimate,
documented medical and personal reasons discussed (in person)
and agreed upon with the instructor prior to the exam or assignment due date.
Requests for testing accommodations must be received through official channels (RCAS).

## Attendance and Participation
Attendance in lab sessions is mandatory unless the instructor communicates
otherwise. Attendance and active participation in lecture sessions is optional,
but will be monitored and considered in borderline grading decisions.

Attendance in lecture is to your advantage. It is your responsibility.
Important material and examples given in lecture may not be in the textbook.
All students are responsible for this material on assignments and exams.
The instructor will *not* drop any student for reasons of lack of attendance.

## Assignment Guidelines
Assignments (homework exercises and laboratory assignments) are due at the
beginning of class on the assigned due date. Late assignments will *not* be
accepted. In order to receive full credit, all assignments must be

- (for handwritten work) completed in pencil on the front side of engineering paper,
- (for typewritten work) printed one-sided on letter-sized paper,
- well-organized, legible, professionally presented, and succinct, and
- stapled together with pages numbered and in order.

All computer work must be your own, fully commented programs.
Each assignment should be submitted as a hard-copy in class.
Failure to comply with these guidelines will result in significant deductions in your assignment grades.

An assignment (homework or lab report) serves to document your work and learning.
As such, each assignment should be relatively self-contained; that is, it should
contain all the information necessary for someone to reproduce your results.
This information may include, but is not limited to: assumptions, equations,
numerical methods, flowcharts, computer program code, results, and discussion.

### Homework Exercises
Homework assignments will consist of exercises covering the material from lecture each week.
They will be chosen so as to aid you in preparation for the lab session.
They may involve a combination of written work, programming, and spreadsheet calculations.

Exercises will be assigned verbally in class and typically will appear on the course website.
They will be graded as a 0, 1, or 2.
A “2” will be received for a good faith effort, meaning the student attempts
to answer *all* the questions posed, provides all results requested and provides a serious,
well-thought-out response to the assignment.
A “1” will be received for an exercise that is either significantly in error,
or is incomplete in some minor way, but in which the student made some attempt.
A “0” will be received for significantly incomplete assignments or assignments
that indicate the student did not take the assignment seriously.

All homework exercises must be identified at the top of each page with
the student's name, the course/section number, and the date in order to receive full credit.

The lowest homework score will be dropped from the final grade.

### Laboratory Assignments
Assigned tasks will be provided each week, but written laboratory reports will
typically be due only every other week. Alternate weeks, no official assignment
will be due.

For laboratory assignments *only*, you may work in groups of three or fewer to
complete the lab assignment and write a single lab report. You will submit one
report per group.

Unless otherwise noted, submit your report as a hard-copy in class and
submit your computer code/files (where applicable) via email.

In order to receive full credit, all lab assignments must be
identified with a cover page containing at least the lab title,
students' names, course/section number, and date.

The lowest lab report score will be dropped from the final grade.

## Exams
The midterm exam will be given in the lab session of Week 6.
You will have the entire two hour period to complete the exam.
It will cover material from Weeks 1--4.

The (cumulative) final exam will be given during final exam week.
You will have the entire two hour period to complete the exam.
It will primarily cover material from Weeks 5--10, but any course material may appear.

Exams will not be made up, except at the discretion of the instructor.

## ME Advising Note
ME 300 is a required ME core course and is always offered in the fall quarter of
each academic year. At the discretion of the department, there may be a single
winter quarter section of the course. You should take this into consideration in
making any decisions to drop the course.

## Academic Honesty
You may discuss homework and lab assignments with other students, but must
complete, write up, and submit your own work. In this class, you will be
expected to conform to the MSOE Student Conduct Code and Policy on Student
Integrity. Students *may not* look at or copy the final documented form of any
other student’s work.

The act of submitting material with your name on it for a grade will be taken as
your statement that all work contained within is your own work, unless otherwise
noted by proper citation of the source.

If assignments with any of the following are handed in, they will be dealt with
as a violation of the above policy:

- identical work handed in by two or more students (or groups of students, for group lab reports),
- portions of an assignment appear verbatim from another student’s work, or
- incorrect analyses with the same identical mistakes are handed in by two or more students.

Violation of this policy can result in a grade of F for the course, and, further, may result
in disciplinary action at the departmental and/or institutional level(s).
